expand README.md (#124)
opencompl/Quidditch: README.md

* CMake 3.21 or newer
* A C++17 compiler
* lld
* Python 3.11
* Ninja (ideally)
* Docker to install the Quidditch toolchain. See [the toolchain directory for more details](runtime/toolchain/README.md)

The repository is self-contained, and contains the definition of the docker container, and contains no magic.
The compilation is driven by CMake, and uses Docker.
Python 3.11 is used for the runtime and the tracing script, as well as PyTorch etc., it's not strictly required for compilation except for the lit tests.
Python 3.12 is not yet supported by PyTorch.
The first time to compile can take up to one hour, to build MLIR, IREE, and the rest of the project.

The docker is mostly used as a convenient way to install the Snitch toolchain, runtime, verilator, etc.
It's not used for the compiler, rather to make the Snitch tools available.
The dockerfile can be found in `runtime/toolchain/Dockerfile`.
The docker toolchain needs to be in sync with the snitch runtime, as the hardware gets continuously updated.

> When updating the snitch runtime submodule, the docker image needs to be updated with the new commit hash to make sure the hardware and software are in sync.

Reviewer: This seems to be either a duplicate sentence

> The easiest way to iterate on the docker image is to develop on it locally, and then pushing it to GitHub, which will detect that the toolchain directory is changed, and will release a new image automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to iterate on the docker image is to develop on it locally, and then push the changes to GitHub, which will detect that the toolchain directory is changed, and will release a new image automatically.
```

This will execute both `codegen` and `runtime` builds as external builds of the top-level cmake.
This is useful for quickly building and testing but may be undesirable for development.
See the respective READMEs in [codegen](codegen/README.md) and [runtime](runtime/README.md) for how to configure them
independently.

> [!NOTE]
> It should be possible to decouple the compilation infrastructure from the runtime, letting users compile the neural networks on their local machines, to then execute it on Linux.
> Everything to do with Verilator is only supported on Linux, so that part cannot be made platform-independent, but the `runtime/toolchain/Dockerfile` can be massaged to exclude everything Verilator-related, to build MLIR+IREE+Quidditch, and be run as a script to produce a compiler that emits everything necessary to just run it on a Linux machine.

## Compiling Neural Networks

Any information you can find on how to use `iree-compile` is applicable, with the only major difference bing the `--iree-hal-target-backends=llvm-cpu`, which also supports our `quidditch` value for the flag, which leverages our flow.

> The inputs to `iree-compile` are all `.mlir` files, so you need to somehow get the file, [here's](https://iree.dev/guides/deployment-configurations/cpu/#compile-and-run-a-program) the guide on how to get one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inputs to `iree-compile` are all `.mlir` files, so you need to somehow get the file, [here's](https://iree.dev/guides/ml-frameworks/) the guide on how to get one.
```
is probably the better link

The PyTorch and ONNX imports are the flakiest of the imports in our experience, although they can be made to work.

The PyTorch flow uses [iree-turbine](https://github.com/iree-org/iree-turbine), which is included in the virtualenv of the Docker container.
We use it to compile nsnet2 (`runtime/samples/nsnet2/NsNet2.py`).

> The MLIR file extracted this way is that it will contain functions that are named the same as the Python model functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MLIR file extracted this way will contain functions that are named the same as the Python model functions.
```

If the model doesn't contain the weights, we recommend seeding the tensors with random data in the Python file for reproducible behavior.

### Adding a new Neural Network

Neural networks live in `samples/`

To add a new model, replicate the structure of the existing models, and add the subdirectory name to `samples/CMakeLists.txt`.

A convenient way to run it is to add a new `test_executable` line at the end of `tests/CMakeLists.txt`
Then run:

``` shell
# Build everything
ninja
# To run a specific test
ctest -R mynewmodel
```

The last command takes a regex so can run multiple tests, and can be parallelized with `-j`

### MLIR to Executable

The simplest example is `runtime/samples/vec_multiply/`.

The `quiddtch_module` macro in the `CMakeLists.txt` turns the MLIR file into an executable.
`ASSERT_XDSL` is a flag that will error out if xDSL micro-kernel compilation fails.

> This macro creates an executable called `mynewmodel` (removing the `.mlir` suffix).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This macro creates a library called `mynewmodel` (removing the `.mlir` suffix).
```

It will also create two new header files, `mynewmodel.h`, and `mynewmodel_module.h` (the device and host code).
These need to be imported in the `main.c` file for your model.
The `add_executable` macro is used to specify the name of the executable that `main.c` will be compiled to, let's say `mynewmodelexecutable`.

`run_model.h` in the `utils/` folder specifies the information needed to run the model, which needs to be filled in the `main.c`.
NB: the module of the mlir module in the input file MUST have a name, which must be specified in the `main.c`.

In summary:

 0. Get your MLIR file from your model
 1. Copy the folder of one of the existing models, and adjust the files to your module
 2. Refer to the `uitls/run_model.h` file for documentation, and other models for examples
 3. Go to the build directory, and run `ninja`, which recompiles everything, including your new changes
 4. The cmake build system mirrors your source directory, so if you added `runtime/samples/mynewmodel/`, the build location will be `build/runtime/samples/mynewmodel`.
 5. Add your new executable to `tests/CMakeLists.txt`

> > NB. you can override the compilation with xDSL by adding `LLVM` to the `uidditch_module` macro, which overrides the XDSL pipeline entirely and just computes everything with stock IREE `llvm-cpu` target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> NB. you can override the compilation with xDSL by adding `LLVM` to the `quidditch_module` macro, which overrides the XDSL pipeline entirely and just computes everything with stock IREE `llvm-cpu` target.
```

### Calling the Neural Network

Once the above steps are executed, you can run your neural network either by directly executing `build/runtime/samples/mynewmodel/mynewmodelexecutable`, or by running `ctest -R mynewmodelexecutable`.
The second way to do it will generate traces.

## Quidditch Compiler Structure

> All source code is in `codegen/compiler/src/Quirritch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All source code is in `codegen/compiler/src/Quidditch`.
```

Within it there are three top level directories:

1. Conversion - containing dialect conversions, in our case Snitch to LLVM and the xDSL linalg to RISC-V lowering
2. Dialect  - where all the dialects (only one right now) are
3. Target  - defines all the passes that aren't a part of the dialect, but rather target optimisations

The biggest and most important file is `QuidditchTarget.cpp`, with the information necessary for adding a new backend to IREE.

### Target

`QuidditchTarget.cpp`

> The QuidditchTargetBackend class sibclasses IREE::HAL::TargetBackend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The QuidditchTargetBackend class subclasses IREE::HAL::TargetBackend.
```

The tile sizes are the size that all cores will be working on, not individual cores, and must fit into half the scratch memory, due to double buffering.
Importantly, if you choose tile sizes where each tile does not fit into half the scratch memory, then compilation will fail.
_TODO proper guide on how to pick tile sizes._

`buildTranslationPassPipeline` is currently specialised for _MatVec_ and _MatMul_, some more work is needed to run other linalg operations.
The first big sequence of `.addPass` contains almost all the optimisations, and the remainder of the function is lowering.

The `serializeExecutable` function takes MLIR llvm input, and constructs an object file, which contains everything including the xDSL microkernels.

N.B. The heuristic to pick the tile sizes for individual cores, which happens after the L1 tiling mentioned above, lives in `TensorTile.cpp`, and just picks the largest parallel dimension, and divides it by 8, which will be iterated on in the future.

### Dialect

> There is currently only one dialect, `snitch`, which might be split up in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is currently only one dialect, `quidditch_snitch`, which might be split up in the future.
```
